get-started:debug and profile (#55)
tikv/tikv-dev-guide: src/get-started/debug-and-profile.md

# Debug and Profile

In previous chapter, we introduce how to build TiKV from source, and in this chapter, we will focus on how to debug and profile TiKV from the view of a developer.

## Prerequisites

* rust-gdb or rust-lldb  
[GDB](https://www.sourceware.org/gdb) and [LLDB](https://lldb.llvm.org/) are common used for debugging a program.  
    * GDB, the GNU Project debugger, allows you to see what is going on `inside' another program while it executes.
    * LLDB is a next generation, high-performance debugger. It is built as a set of reusable components which highly leverage existing libraries in the larger LLVM Project, such as the Clang expression parser and LLVM disassembler.  
    * rust-gdb and rust-lldb are installed in rust. But lldb is not installed by default. So if you want to use rust-lldb, please install lldb firstly.

>     rust-gdb/rust-lldb is an enhanced tools based on gdb/lldb for rust programming, and the usage is almost the same with gdb/lldb. About how to choose betwen rust-gdb and rust-lldb, it depends on the platform you are using and the familiarity of these tools. If you are new hand on the debugging tools, rust-lldb is recommended on MacOS and rust-gdb is recommended on Linux, like Ubuntu and CentOS. 

Reviewer: the requirement makes me confused. it would be better to directly explain these questions:
- why `gdb` and `lldb` can not (or is not recommended to) debug rust programs?
- how to install `rust-gdb` and `rust-lldb`?
- what is recommended in MacOS and Linux (e.g. Ubuntu, CentOS) (you already did in the last statement)

to explain what `gdb`/`lldb`/`rust-gdb`/`rust-lldb` are, you can simply give a link for people who are the first time to hear these tools.

Author: I think, the following should be enough to explain the three questions. I will added them. 
1. rust-gdb and rust-lldb are both installed with rustc together, however, they depend on gdb and lldb, which are need be installed by user himself/herself. 
2. gdb and lldb can also be used. 
3. Basically, rust-gdb is a wrapper that loads external Python pretty-printing scripts into GDB. This is useful (and somewhat necessary) when debugging more complex Rust programs because it significantly improves the display of Rust data types. rust-lldb is similiar. So rust-gdb and rust-lldb are recommended.

Author: And i would like just keep gdb/lldb link and remove the description.

* perf  
[Perf](https://perf.wiki.kernel.org/index.php/Main_Page) is common Linux profiler. It's powerful: it can instrument CPU performance counters, tracepoints, kprobes, and uprobes (dynamic tracing). It can be installed as following:
```bash
Ubuntu: sudo apt-get install linux-tools
CentOS: sudo yum install perf
```

*For simplicity, we will introduce the debugging with rust-gdb, audience can also use rust-lldb.*

> ## Debug TiKV with GDB

Reviewer: should it be renamed to `Debug TiKV with rust-gdb`?

* p(print) args to print args.
* ls to show the surrounding codes of breakpoint.
* s(step) to step in the function.
* n(next) to step over current line.
* c(continue) to continue the program.
* watch to set a data watch breakpoint.

An example to deug an unit test named `test_raw_batch_get` is as following:
* build `tikv` unit test binary with `cargo test -p tikv test_raw_batch_get` and binary is located in `target/debug/deps/tikv-<somehash>`
* launch the binary with rust-gdb
```
rust-gdb --args target/debug/deps/tikv-<somehash> test_raw_batch_get
```
* debug 

![gdb-tikv-ut](../media/gdb_tikv_ut.png)

As the marks shown in above picture, Firstly, a breakpoint is set in line `4650` of file `src/storage/mod.rs` and set condition that `api_version == 2`, which means program only pause when it hit here and the variable `api_version` is equals to 2. Then `run` is executed and the proram start to run. The following steps are some examples to use gdb commands to execute the `step over` and `print`.

### Debug TiKV cluster with specified tikv-server binary

1. Build tikv-server binary with the guide in [previous chapter](./build-tikv-from-source.md).

> 2. The binary files are in \${TIKV_SOURCE_CODE}/target/debug/, we can also get one release mode binary with `make release`, and the binary is in \${TIKV_SOURCE_CODE}/target/release/.

Reviewer: will `make release` eliminate the debug info? if so, we'd better remind audiences here to use `make debug`

Author: done

3. TiUP is recommanded to deploy a TiKV cluster. It's easy to deploy a local TiKV cluster with tiup playground. Please refer [Get start in 5 minutes](https://tikv.org/docs/5.1/concepts/tikv-in-5-minutes/#set-up-a-local-tikv-cluster-with-the-default-options). With TiUP, we can also specify the tikv-server binary file during deploy. The following is an emxample:

```bash
TIKV_BIN=~/tikv/target/release/tikv-server

tiup playground v5.0.4 --mode tikv-slim 
  --kv 3 --kv.binpath ${TIKV_BIN} --kv.config ./tikv_rawkv.toml
```

4. Now we get one TiKV cluster with three TiKV virtual nodes and one pd node. we can use rust-gdb to attach the tikv-server process.

```bash
rust-gdb attach ${PID}
```

> pid of tikv-server can be abtained with following command:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
pid of tikv-server can be obtained with the following command:
```

```bash
ps -aux|grep tikv-server
```
Now the standard GDB interface is shown, we can use rust-gdb as same an gdb. 

## Profiling TiKV
When we want to find the cpu bottleneck of one program, we can use [perf Linux profiler](https://www.brendangregg.com/perf.html) to find the events. It can also be used for profiling TiKV.  

Here is one example:

```bash
perf record -g -p `pidof tikv-server`

perf report
```

> An profile file is gnerated and we can see the cpu usage during perf recording.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A profile file is generated and we can see the CPU usage during perf recording.
```

# Debug and Profile

In previous chapter, we introduce how to build TiKV from source, and in this chapter, we will focus on how to debug and profile TiKV from the view of a developer.

## Prerequisites

* rust-gdb or rust-lldb  
[GDB](https://www.sourceware.org/gdb) and [LLDB](https://lldb.llvm.org/) are commonly used for debugging a program.  

>     * `rust-gdb` and `rust-lldb` are both installed with `rustup` together, however, they depend on `gdb` and `lldb`, which are need be installed by yourself. Here is the installation of gdb/lldb.

Reviewer 2: There are gdb, GDB, `gdb` in the doc. Suggest to be in same style.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    * `rust-gdb` and `rust-lldb` are both installed with `rustup` together, however, they depend on `gdb` and `lldb`, which are need to be installed by yourself. Here is the installation of gdb/lldb.
```

CentOS: sudo yum install perf
```

*For simplicity, we will introduce the debugging with rust-gdb, audience can also use rust-lldb.*

## Debug TiKV with rust-gdb

### Debug a unit test binary in TiKV

1. Build the unit test binary, for example we want to debug the test case: [test_raw_get_key_ttl](https://github.com/tikv/tikv/blob/a7d1595f5486616be34e0cf2bbf372edb5f0e85a/src/storage/mod.rs#L5352-L5356)

Firstly, we can get the binary file with cargo command, like: 
```bash
cargo test -p tikv test_raw_get_key_ttl
```
A binary file located in `target/debug/deps/tikv-some-hash` will be produced.

2. Debug the binary with rust-gdb:

```bash
rust-gdb --args target/debug/deps/tikv-4a32c89a00a366cb test_raw_get_key_ttl
```
3. Now the standard gdb interface is shown. We can debug the unit test with gdb command. Here are some simple commands.

* r(run) to start the program.
* b(break) file_name:line_number to set a breakpoint.
* p(print) args to print args.
* ls to show the surrounding codes of breakpoint.
* s(step) to step in the function.
* n(next) to step over current line.
* c(continue) to continue the program.
* watch to set a data watch breakpoint.

> An example to deug an unit test named `test_raw_batch_get` is as following:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
An example of debugging an unit test named `test_raw_batch_get` is as following:
```

> * build `tikv` unit test binary with `cargo test -p tikv test_raw_batch_get` and binary is located in `target/debug/deps/tikv-<somehash>`

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Build `tikv` unit test binary with `cargo test -p tikv test_raw_batch_get` and binary is located in `target/debug/deps/tikv-<somehash>`
```

> * launch the binary with rust-gdb

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Launch the binary with rust-gdb
```

```
rust-gdb --args target/debug/deps/tikv-<somehash> test_raw_batch_get
```
* debug 

![gdb-tikv-ut](../media/gdb_tikv_ut.png)

> As the marks shown in above picture, Firstly, a breakpoint is set in line `4650` of file `src/storage/mod.rs` and set condition that `api_version == 2`, which means program only pause when it hit here and the variable `api_version` is equals to 2. Then `run` is executed and the program start to run. The following steps are some examples to use gdb commands to execute the `step over` and `print`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
As the marks shown in above screenshot, firstly, a breakpoint is set in line `4650` of file `src/storage/mod.rs` and set condition that `api_version == 2`, which means program only pause when it hit here and the variable `api_version` is equals to 2. Then `run` is executed and the program start to run. The following steps are some examples to use gdb commands to execute the `step over` and `print`.
```

### Debug TiKV cluster with specified tikv-server binary

1. Build tikv-server binary with the guide in [previous chapter](./build-tikv-from-source.md).

> 2. The binary files are in \${TIKV_SOURCE_CODE}/target/debug/, debug binary is recommended as it keep much useful debug info, such as codes, lines, local variables.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
2. The binary files are located in `\${TIKV_SOURCE_CODE}/target/debug/tikv-server`. Debug binary is recommended as it keep much useful debug info, such as codes, lines, local variables.
```

Reviewer 2: I think we can assume that "debug target" is using. The difference between debug & release target is out of scope of this guide.

> 3. TiUP is recommended to deploy a TiKV cluster. It's easy to deploy a local TiKV cluster with tiup playground. Please refer [Get start in 5 minutes](https://tikv.org/docs/5.1/concepts/tikv-in-5-minutes/#set-up-a-local-tikv-cluster-with-the-default-options). With TiUP, we can also specify the tikv-server binary file during deploy. The following is an example:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
3. TiUP is recommended to deploy a TiKV cluster. It's easy to deploy a local TiKV cluster with tiup playground. Please refer to [Get start in 5 minutes](https://tikv.org/docs/5.1/concepts/tikv-in-5-minutes/#set-up-a-local-tikv-cluster-with-the-default-options). With TiUP, we can also specify the tikv-server binary file during deploy. The following is an example:
```

```bash
TIKV_BIN=~/tikv/target/release/tikv-server

tiup playground v5.0.4 --mode tikv-slim 
  --kv 3 --kv.binpath ${TIKV_BIN} --kv.config ./tikv_rawkv.toml
```

> 4. Now we get one TiKV cluster with three TiKV virtual nodes and one pd node. we can use rust-gdb to attach the tikv-server process.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
4. Now we get one TiKV cluster with three TiKV virtual nodes and one PD node. we can use rust-gdb to attach the tikv-server process.
```

```bash
rust-gdb attach ${PID}
```

pid of tikv-server can be obtained with the following command:

```bash
ps -aux|grep tikv-server
```
Now the standard GDB interface is shown, we can use rust-gdb as same an gdb. 

## Profiling TiKV

> When we want to find the cpu bottleneck of one program, we can use [perf Linux profiler](https://www.brendangregg.com/perf.html) to find the events. It can also be used for profiling TiKV.  

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When we want to find the CPU bottleneck of one program, we can use [perf Linux profiler](https://www.brendangregg.com/perf.html) to find the procedures and how much CPU time they are consuming. It can also be used for profiling TiKV.  
```

Here is one example:

```bash

> perf record -g -p `pidof tikv-server`

Reviewer 2: Suggest using same method of getting PID in debugging and profiling section.

perf report
```

A profile file is generated and we can see the CPU usage during perf recording.

> Another example is generating the flame graph with perf and [FlameGraph](http://www.brendangregg.com/flamegraphs.html) tools. 

Reviewer 2: Just one example including text report & flame graph would be enough.

1. Firstly, download the FlameGraph code.
```
git clone https://github.com/brendangregg/FlameGraph.git
```
2. Recording performance data with `perf`
```
perf record -g -p `pidof tikv-server`
```
3. Parse the perf data with script.
```
perf script -i perf.data &> perf.unfold
```
4. generate the flame graph
```
./stackcollapse-perf.pl perf.unfold &> perf.folded

./flamegraph.pl perf.folded > perf.svg
```

> 5. We can open the `svg` file with `chrome` or other browsers. With the flame graph, we can see the performance data more intuitively.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
5. We can open the `svg` file with `Chrome` or other browsers. With the flame graph, we can see the performance data more intuitively.
```

# Debug and Profile

> In previous chapter, we introduce how to build TiKV from source, and in this chapter, we will focus on how to debug and profile TiKV from the view of a developer.

Reviewer 2: How do you think of this suggestion ? I do not see changes on this sentence.

## Prerequisites

* rust-gdb or rust-lldb  

> rust-gdb and rust-lldb are installed in rust. But lldb is not installed by default. So if you want to use rust-lldb, please install lldb firstly.  

Author: done

> rust-gdb and rust-lldb are installed in rust. But lldb is not installed by default. So if you want to use rust-lldb, please install lldb firstly.  

Reviewer 2: I still feel confused about the `Prerequisites` section. I think we can refer to the [`Debug and profile`](https://pingcap.github.io/tidb-dev-guide/get-started/debug-and-profile.html) chapter of TiDB.

How about like this:
* Use `rust-gdb` or `rust-lldb` for debugging
  * What are these two tools
  * How to install
  * Use `rust-gdb` for debugging running TiKV
  * Use `rust-gdb` for debugging test case
  * ...
* Use perf for profile
  * What is perf
  * How to install
  * Use perf for profile TiKV
  * ...

rust-gdb is an enhanced tools based on gdb for rust programming, and the usage is almost the same with gdb, if you want to learn more about gdb, please see [GDB](https://www.sourceware.org/gdb/).  

* perf  

> Perf is common Linux profiler. It's powerful: it can instrument CPU performance counters, tracepoints, kprobes, and uprobes (dynamic tracing). It can be installed as following:

Author: done

```bash
Ubuntu: sudo apt-get install linux-tools
CentOS: sudo yum install perf
```

*For simplicity, we will introduce the debugging with rust-gdb, audience can also use rust-lldb.*

## Running TiKV with GDB

> ### Debug a unit test binary in TiKV

Reviewer 2: Suggest introducing in three scenario: 1. debug a `tikv-server` binary, 2. debug a running `tikv-server`, and 3. debug a failed unit test.

Author: "1. debug tikv-server" is not easy i think, as developer need start `tikv-server` with parameters manually. It's recommended that start `tikv-server` with tiup and attach the tikv-server with gdb, like "2. debug a running `tikv-server` ", which is covered in this chapter.

Reviewer 2: Debug `tikv-server` will be necessary for some scenarios, e.g., debugging a startup issue. For developers, it should not be difficult to start `tikv-server` manually. There is even such a [guide](https://tikv.org/docs/5.1/deploy/install/test/#install-binary-manually), and we can link it to here.

1. Build the unit test binary, for example we want to debug the test case: [test_raw_get_key_ttl](https://github.com/tikv/tikv/blob/a7d1595f5486616be34e0cf2bbf372edb5f0e85a/src/storage/mod.rs#L5352-L5356)

Firstly, we can get the binary file with cargo command, like: 
```bash

> cargo test tikv test_raw_get_key_ttl

Author: sorry for the mistake. should be `cargo test -p tikv test_raw_get_key_ttl`

```

> A binary file located in `target/debug/deps/tikv-some-hash` will be produced.

Author: when running `cargo test -p tikv test_raw_get_key_ttl`, the binary name will be displayed, i will clarify this in following commit.

2. Debug the binary with rust-gdb:

```bash
rust-gdb --args target/debug/deps/tikv-4a32c89a00a366cb test_raw_get_key_ttl
```
3. Now the standard gdb interface is shown. We can debug the unit test with gdb command. Here are some simple usage examples.

* r(run) to start the program.
* b(break) file_name:line_number to set a breakpoint.
* p(print) args to print args.
* ls to show the surrounding codes of breakpoint.
* s(step) to step in the function.
* n(next) to step to next line.
* c(continue) to continue the program.
* watch to set a data watch breakpoint.

### Debug TiKV cluster with specified tikv-server binary

1. Build tikv-server binary with the guide in [previous chapter](./build-tikv-from-source.md).

> 2. The binary files are in \${TIKV_SOURCE_CODE}/target/debug/, we can also get one release mode binary with make release, and the binary is in \${TIKV_SOURCE_CODE}/target/release/.

Author: done

3. TiUP is recommanded to deploy a TiKV cluster. It's easy to deploy a local TiKV cluster with tiup playground. Please refer [Get start in 5 minutes](https://tikv.org/docs/5.1/concepts/tikv-in-5-minutes/#set-up-a-local-tikv-cluster-with-the-default-options). With TiUP, we can also specify the tikv-server binary file during deploy. The following is an emxample:

```bash
TIKV_BIN=~/tikv/target/release/tikv-server

tiup playground v5.0.4 --mode tikv-slim 
  --kv 3 --kv.binpath ${TIKV_BIN} --kv.config ./tikv_rawkv.toml
```

4. Now we get one TiKV cluster with three TiKV virtual nodes and one pd node. we can use rust-gdb to attach the tikv-server process.

```bash
rust-gdb attach ${PID}
```

pid of tikv-server can be abtained with following command:

```bash
ps -aux|grep tikv-server
```
Now the standard GDB interface is shown, we can use rust-gdb as same an gdb. 

## Profiling TiKV
When we want to find the cpu bottleneck of one program, we can use [perf Linux profiler](https://www.brendangregg.com/perf.html) to find the events. It can also be used for profiling TiKV.  

Here is one example:

```bash
perf record -g -p `pidof tikv-server`

perf report
```

> ## Monitor TiKV cluster

Author: ok

## Prerequisites

* rust-gdb or rust-lldb  
rust-gdb and rust-lldb are installed in rust. But lldb is not installed by default. So if you want to use rust-lldb, please install lldb firstly.  
rust-gdb is an enhanced tools based on gdb for rust programming, and the usage is almost the same with gdb, if you want to learn more about gdb, please see [GDB](https://www.sourceware.org/gdb/).  

* perf  
Perf is common Linux profiler. It's powerful: it can instrument CPU performance counters, tracepoints, kprobes, and uprobes (dynamic tracing). It can be installed as following:
```bash
Ubuntu: sudo apt-get install linux-tools
CentOS: sudo yum install perf
```

*For simplicity, we will introduce the debugging with rust-gdb, audience can also use rust-lldb.*

## Running TiKV with GDB

### Debug a unit test binary in TiKV

1. Build the unit test binary, for example we want to debug the test case: [test_raw_get_key_ttl](https://github.com/tikv/tikv/blob/a7d1595f5486616be34e0cf2bbf372edb5f0e85a/src/storage/mod.rs#L5352-L5356)

Firstly, we can get the binary file with cargo command, like: 
```bash
cargo test tikv test_raw_get_key_ttl
```

> We can see the binary file is \${TIKV_SOURCE_CODE}/target/debug/deps/tikv-4a32c89a00a366cb(The file name is depends).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
A binary file located in `target/debug/deps/tikv-some-hash` will be produced.
```

```
3. Now the standard gdb interface is shown. We can debug the unit test with gdb command. Here are some simple usage examples.

* r(run) to start the program.
* b(break) file_name:line_number to set a breakpoint.
* p(print) args to print args.
* ls to show the surrounding codes of breakpoint.
* s(step) to step in the function.
* n(next) to step to next line.
* c(continue) to continue the program.
* watch to set a data watch breakpoint.

### Debug TiKV cluster with specified tikv-server binary

1. Build tikv-server binary with the guide in [previous chapter](./build-tikv-from-source.md).
2. The binary files are in \${TIKV_SOURCE_CODE}/target/debug/, we can also get one release mode binary with make release, and the binary is in \${TIKV_SOURCE_CODE}/target/release/.
3. TiUP is recommanded to deploy a TiKV cluster. It's easy to deploy a local TiKV cluster with tiup playground. Please refer [Get start in 5 minutes](https://tikv.org/docs/5.1/concepts/tikv-in-5-minutes/#set-up-a-local-tikv-cluster-with-the-default-options). With TiUP, we can also specify the tikv-server binary file during deploy. The following is an emxample:

```bash
TIKV_BIN=~/tikv/target/release/tikv-server

> tiup playground v5.0.4 --host 0.0.0.0 --db 0 --tag clst01 \

Reviewer 3: There is a mode for tikv only cluster, it could be used like:
```sh
tiup playground v5.0.3 --mode tikv-slim --kv 3 --kv.config ./tikv_rawkv.toml
```

Author: solved
